Hi, I'm so pleased to be here at the virtual day for USAR this year to give
you a first look at Positron. My name is Julia Silge and I have been working in
data science for about the last 10 years, for about the last 5 years as largely a
tool builder for building tools for other data scientists to use. I work at
PositPBC these days, formerly known as rstudio, and there I worked on R
packages for machine learning and modeling, R and Python packages for ML
Ops, but for about the last two years I have been working on Positron, which is
this new next-generation IDE for data science that I'm excited to get to give
you a glimpse of today. That's a little bit about me and I'm gonna say kind of
what I think you are like so that you can understand the perspective which I
am speaking here about Positron. I'm assuming you are an R user, you have
probably used rstudio, perhaps you have dabbled in another editor or IDE, but I'm
assuming that largely most of your R usage happened in rstudio. So let's dig
into Positron. Positron is a new next-generation data science IDE. It's
been available for a beta testing for about the last year and just this summer
Positron has moved to stable releases, so out of our beta period. It's an IDE, which
stands for integrated development environment, and that's a piece of
software that allows you as a user to yourself develop software. So this
example, this screenshot, shows someone using Positron together with Cordo.
They're writing a report in Cordo using R and you can see the source code on one
side and then the rendered report over on the other side. So this is an IDE.
There's a ton of IDEs out there in the world and over the course of this talk I
want to tell you what's new and or different and or special about Positron
so you can understand why we're building it, how an R user should think
about Positron compared to the other options that are out there for you, and
whether it might be a good fit for you or whether it's something you don't need
to worry about. The first thing I want to emphasize is that Positron is an IDE
specifically for doing data science. So at the company where I work at Posit, we
have extensive domain knowledge in data science tooling. We know that someone
who is writing code for data analysis or data science or machine learning, that
person is different from someone who is writing general-purpose code like
writing code for a website or a mobile app or something. We're huge proponents
of code first data science as opposed to, you know, pointy clicky kinds of tools
but tools that are built for a typical software engineer who is writing code
for, you know, some sort of general purpose, those kinds of tools are
often not a good fit for someone who is writing code to analyze data. So all
across our org, pretty much every single thing we make or do or build is informed
by how how deeply we know and believe in these things that the code first data
science and also people who are doing data science are different from software
engineers. So we believe by thinking about these two things, we can make you
as a data practitioner more productive by building tools that are specifically
for you and the kind of tasks you need to do. And that's exactly why we're
building Positron, this new IDE. There isn't something quite like Positron
out there which is one platform where you can do all of your data science. So
that's the first thing. The second thing I want to tell you is that Positron is
a polyglot or multilingual IDE. It's currently built today with support for
both R and for Python. A lot of environments that are built that are
specifically built for data analysis are built to use one language for
scientific computing. Tools you may have heard about or use yourself that fall
into this category include RStudio, include MATLAB. There's a lot of these
where the environment is built just to use one language for scientific
computing. These of course are tools people are hugely productive with, but
there also are limits to these kinds of tools or IDEs, especially for that
proportion of people who use multiple languages for data science. This can
happen literally on the same project. Your project can combine two
languages. It can happen over the span of a week or weeks as you move from one
project to another that may use different languages. Almost certainly
it's going to happen over the span of your career. I know this has been true
for me in my career that I have used different languages over my
professional life, and it's true for most of us. I know many of you are
already familiar with this. You do things like build R packages that have C
code in them, or you build complex shiny apps and so you both write R and
JavaScript, or maybe you are someone who uses R in addition to Python. By
contrast, with the IDEs or editors that are built for one language, Positron is
built with front-end user-facing features that are about the tasks you
need to do when you're analyzing data and doing other data-specific kind of
work, and then back-end language packs that provide the engines for all of
those features and tasks. In this screenshot, you see that. You see a
console for iterative running of code. You see a place for your plots, a place
for your variables, a place in addition to where you're actually editing your
main source code here. You'll notice that this is all running on Python,
though, not on R. Even though it looks a lot like RStudio, it's running
Python. If you are someone who uses more than one language in your day-to-day
work, then Positron is built with you and your needs in mind. One of the big
investments we needed to make in order to build Positron was new modern
language tooling for R. Positron has a brand new Jupyter kernel for R that's
called Arc. A Jupyter kernel is software that provides R a way to
talk back and forth with a front-end. If you hear Jupyter kernel, you might think
Jupyter Notebook. In that case, that is an example of a front-end, but how we
use it in Positron is that Positron as a whole is the front-end. The kernel
allows the back-end language runtime, R, to talk back and forth so that the
front-end knows what to do when R does something there. It gives you things
like completions, diagnostics, debugging, just a ton of features that improve
the experience of writing R code. In this screenshot, I've got one of the R
packages that I maintain up here, and this is showing me debugging the
function that I wrote in the R package. This is possible because of
this new modern language tooling for R that we've been able to invest in.
The exciting thing is that it is a Jupyter kernel, so it can be used anywhere a
Jupyter kernel can be used. The Positron team has also built a new
formatter for R that's called AIR. These are both examples of how the
architectural decisions around Positron let us build modular, reusable pieces of
modern language tooling that can be used in multiple contexts. AIR is
really interesting because it works great in Positron, but it also works
great in RStudio. It also works great in VS Code. It also works great from the
command line. It's exciting to me as someone who loves R to see how the
architectural decisions we've made allow us to bring things to the whole R
community. To learn more about AIR, I would draw your attention to another
useR! talk happening in person on August 10th by my co-workers Lionel, Henry, and
Davis Vaughn. The third thing I want to highlight about Positron is that it is
both familiar and extensible. It's familiar to many of you who are
watching this video because it is inspired pretty directly by RStudio.
Many of the people working on Positron right now are the same exact people who
have worked on RStudio. Here you see what that means. This is a
very RStudio-like interface where you see a console, you see a source editor,
you see a very interactive help pane, but it's being used with Python instead
of with R. If you are someone who has wanted to work with Python and just
always felt like, I wish I had something like RStudio, then this is great
news for you. However, for some of you, this may bring up feelings of concern, of
anxiety. You may be curious about what is happening to RStudio. RStudio
is incredibly stable, solid software. It has well over a decade, I
believe well over 15 years actually, of real-world use on it. It is true that as
of today, Posit is investing more in this new IDE, Positron, than in RStudio.
That is true. However, we expect people to use RStudio for many, many years
to come. We're committed to maintenance for RStudio in the long haul. If RStudio
meets your needs today, do not have FOMO. You should not feel any worry or
anxiety about continuing to use it because it is going to continue to be
there for you. That's about Positron feeling familiar. Positron also feels
familiar to some of you who are listening to this because it's built on
the open-source components that make up Visual Studio Code. Positron is a
fork of the open-source project that Microsoft uses to make their
proprietary builds of VS Code. This is an architectural decision that was
made as we're exploring this idea of building a new IDE. Building on Code
OSS, as it is known, allows us to focus on the data science features, not the
sort of general features that all kinds of people who write code need.
Not, how do we make an editor where people can edit code? We don't have to
worry about that. We just kind of make a deal where we say, okay, we will accept
largely how things work in VS Code, and we add on top of that the things that
are specific about what someone doing statistical analysis needs. That
lets us focus on the kinds of things we have expertise in and that we want to be
able to focus on. The other thing here is that building on Code OSS opens up the
wide world of VS Code compatible extensions for users who want a data
science IDE instead of a general-purpose IDE. If you're coming from our studio,
this ability to customize your IDE is new and may be a reason that you might
want to try out Positron. Extensions exist for everything from
any theme you can possibly imagine to customize how it looks to support for
data platforms that you want to access, like Databricks and Snowflakes.
Actually, you also can build extensions yourself. The barrier to entry to
building an extension is lower than what it would have taken to customize our
studio, for example, there. Now, when folks hear about extensions or if they
already know about extensions, sometimes those folks ask, why not just build
extensions? Why not just, instead of forking the whole thing and making a new
thing, a new thing here, Positron, why not just build extensions that would allow
VS Code to be usable for data science? Now, we thought very carefully
about that. We thought, think carefully about the features that are part of
Positron itself versus what we do with integration with extensions. So, we love
extensions. We make extensions. So, we at Posit have created and
maintain extensions for Quarto, for Shiny, for Publishing, to Posit Connect.
This screenshot shows that. Someone is mid-deployment, just in the process of
publishing this Quarto dashboard to Posit Connect. We are all in on extensions,
huge fans of the extension ecosystem. However, because we have learned about
extensions, we also know about the limits of what an extension can do and not
everything that we believe we need for a first-class data science IDE can be
built into extensions. So, we're all in, but we think very carefully about what
goes in the core of Positron itself and what can be an extension. If you want to
think about it in a very shorthand, when we need more of the UI to be
integrated and connected, then it needs to be in the core of the product rather
than in an extension. Building on top of Code OSS, something else this lets us do
is it gives us opportunities to provide functionality for our users that just
has not been available to our studio users. So, one example of this is the
Test Explorer for R packages. So, this screenshot shows an R package
that I maintain, and what we see here is there's this rich UI for
running and understanding your package tests, and this kind of thing has
never been available in our studio. The way this works is that Code OSS provides
the front end here, the UI, and then we build out a back end for how our
packages get parsed and understood by this kind of UI that we have here.
Specifically for R packages, as someone who maintains a number of them myself,
I'm really excited about what Positron offers to folks who are building these
packages that then get to be used by the whole R community. Now, if I'm here
on a video talking about a new IDE in 2025, I know one of the very first
questions that a lot of you have is how and in what ways Positron is set up to
work with LLMs. So, like I mentioned before, Positron is not a general-purpose
software engineering IDE. So, if you are familiar with other forks of VS Code,
like Cursor and Windsurf, we don't see those as our direct competitors because
those are general-purpose software engineering IDEs. Instead, our goals are
to build an IDE for data science specifically, something that is useful
for statistical analysis. And how we think about AI integration and LLM code
assistance, it's deeply informed by this perspective on data science that
we have. We want to ask, what do people doing statistical analysis need when it
comes to LLMs? What are the legitimately useful applications for LLMs in such an
IDE? I personally would make, if I were to make a list of that, of things that are
legitimately useful today, one would be initial exploratory data analysis with
new data sets, just like that, like quick, like let's write a bunch of code to find
out what's in a data set. Another example that I think is legitimately useful
today, generating test cases, like writing tests for, say, an R package,
generating comments. Another thing is navigating and understanding a complex
code base. That's another example that I think is legitimately useful for people,
for example, who use R today. So, we at Posit, we are not training new models,
but rather we're building tools on top of these classes of models and on top of
the model providers. So, in this IDE, in Positron, what that looks like is these
integrations, these IDE integrations. It looks like things like commands that you
can use in chat, chat participants that you can go on to make this very data
science aware LLM integration. So, this screenshot shows me using Positron
Assistant, as it is known. So, the assistant is over there on one side. I've
got my console, and then I'm seeing the results of the code that the
assistant is running. So, Positron Assistant can be run in three modes, ask,
edit, and agent. Here, I'm using it in an agent mode, where I actually let the
assistant run code iteratively in the console, and both the assistant and I see
the results. This is powerful because it is built for data science, because it is
deeply integrated into the ideas as a whole. So, like, here is an example of
something I typed here, where I say, oh, okay, that last plot you made,
let's make that again. But this data set is about Pokemon from a recent
Heidi Tuesday. It's like, okay, I want to, like, let me please make that plot again,
but with, like, a different variable. And then here is the assistant's response
here, where it generates code for me, and then I can click a button to run it in
the console there. So, if you want to learn more about what the rise of these
models mean for our users, I would point you to the first keynote for UseR this
year by Hadley Wickham about using AI in the R ecosystem. So, if you are
interested now in trying out Positron, I would point you to positron.posit.co
for documentation and installers. I would invite you to join us on GitHub with any
feedback that you have, questions, bug reports, et cetera. If you're a customer
of Posit's, Positron is currently available on Posit Workbench in preview.
And with that, I will say, thank you very much.